xapian-core/docs/index.rst, before:

.. raw:: html

    <div align="center">

`website <http://xapian.org/>`_ \| `install <install.html>`_ \|
`quickstart <quickstart.html>`_ \| `overview <overview.html>`_ \|
`sysadmins <admin_notes.html>`_ \| `scalability <scalability.html>`_ \|
`API <apidoc/html/annotated.html>`_ \| `deprecated <deprecation.html>`_
\| `IR <intro_ir.html>`_ \| `wiki <http://trac.xapian.org/wiki>`_

.. raw:: html

    </div>
    <hr>

Xapian - the open source search engine
======================================

Documentation
-------------

A number of pieces of documentation are available.

The Omega search application has its `own documentation
<http://xapian.org/docs/omega/>`_, and there's also separate
documentation for the `other language bindings
<http://xapian.org/docs/bindings/>`_.

We suggest you start by reading the `Installation
Guide <install.html>`_, which covers downloading the code, and
unpacking, configuring, building and installing it.

For a quick introduction to our software, including a walk-through
example of an application for searching through some data, read the
`Quickstart <quickstart.html>`_ document.

The `glossary <glossary.html>`_ provides definitions for specialized
terminology you might encounter while using Xapian.

The `Overview <overview.html>`_ explains the API which Xapian provides
to programmers.  A full `API Reference <apidoc/html/index.html>`_
(`PDF <apidoc.pdf>`_) is automatically collated using doxygen from
documentation comments in the source code.  There's also a list of
`deprecated features <deprecation.html>`_ which lists features scheduled for
removal, and also features already removed, along with suggestions for
replacements.

If you want to learn more about probabilistic information retrieval,
there's a (reasonably mathematical) `introduction to the ideas behind
Xapian <intro_ir.html>`_ which also suggests some books you might want
to read.

There are a number of documents which cover particular features:

-  `BM25 Weighting Scheme <bm25.html>`_
-  `Collapsing <collapsing.html>`_
-  `Database Replication <replication.html>`_
-  `Faceting <facets.html>`_
-  `Indexing <termgenerator.html>`_
-  `PostingSource <postingsource.html>`_
-  `Query Parser <queryparser.html>`_
-  `Remote Backend <remote.html>`_
-  `Serialising Queries and Documents <serialisation.html>`_
-  `Sorting Results <sorting.html>`_
-  `Spelling Correction <spelling.html>`_
-  `Stemming Algorithms <stemming.html>`_
-  `Synonym Support <synonyms.html>`_
-  `Value Ranges <valueranges.html>`_

For those wishing to do development work on the Xapian library itself,
there is `documentation of Xapian's internals <internals.html>`_
available.

We also have a `wiki <http://trac.xapian.org/wiki>`_ for documentation
and examples contributed by the Xapian community.

Commit message:

Backport change from trunk: docs/index.rst: Add link to new "getting started" guide.
git-svn-id: file:///home/xapian-svn/xapian/branches/1.2@16395 6b2f1b92-a4f3-0310-943f-de3cbe41748b

xapian-core/docs/index.rst, after:

.. raw:: html

    <div align="center">

`website <http://xapian.org/>`_ \| `install <install.html>`_ \|
`quickstart <quickstart.html>`_ \| `overview <overview.html>`_ \|
`sysadmins <admin_notes.html>`_ \| `scalability <scalability.html>`_ \|
`API <apidoc/html/annotated.html>`_ \| `deprecated <deprecation.html>`_
\| `IR <intro_ir.html>`_ \| `wiki <http://trac.xapian.org/wiki>`_

.. raw:: html

    </div>
    <hr>

Xapian - the open source search engine
======================================

Getting Started
---------------

There's a new
`Getting Started with Xapian <http://getting-started-with-xapian.readthedocs.org/>`_
guide, which is the recommended place to start.

Documentation
-------------

The Omega search application has its `own documentation
<http://xapian.org/docs/omega/>`_, and there's also separate
documentation for the `other language bindings
<http://xapian.org/docs/bindings/>`_.

We suggest you start by reading the `Installation
Guide <install.html>`_, which covers downloading the code, and
unpacking, configuring, building and installing it.

For a quick introduction to our software, including a walk-through
example of an application for searching through some data, read the
`Quickstart <quickstart.html>`_ document.

The `glossary <glossary.html>`_ provides definitions for specialized
terminology you might encounter while using Xapian.

The `Overview <overview.html>`_ explains the API which Xapian provides
to programmers.  A full `API Reference <apidoc/html/index.html>`_
(`PDF <apidoc.pdf>`_) is automatically collated using doxygen from
documentation comments in the source code.  There's also a list of
`deprecated features <deprecation.html>`_ which lists features scheduled for
removal, and also features already removed, along with suggestions for
replacements.

If you want to learn more about probabilistic information retrieval,
there's a (reasonably mathematical) `introduction to the ideas behind
Xapian <intro_ir.html>`_ which also suggests some books you might want
to read.

There are a number of documents which cover particular features:

-  `BM25 Weighting Scheme <bm25.html>`_
-  `Collapsing <collapsing.html>`_
-  `Database Replication <replication.html>`_
-  `Faceting <facets.html>`_
-  `Indexing <termgenerator.html>`_
-  `PostingSource <postingsource.html>`_
-  `Query Parser <queryparser.html>`_
-  `Remote Backend <remote.html>`_
-  `Serialising Queries and Documents <serialisation.html>`_
-  `Sorting Results <sorting.html>`_
-  `Spelling Correction <spelling.html>`_
-  `Stemming Algorithms <stemming.html>`_
-  `Synonym Support <synonyms.html>`_
-  `Value Ranges <valueranges.html>`_

For those wishing to do development work on the Xapian library itself,
there is `documentation of Xapian's internals <internals.html>`_
available.

We also have a `wiki <http://trac.xapian.org/wiki>`_ for documentation
and examples contributed by the Xapian community.
