xapian-core/docs/remote.rst, before:

Remote Backend
==============

This document describes how to make use of the facilities in Xapian for
distributed searches.

Overview
--------

There are two sides to the distributed searching. The client end is the
program initiating the search on behalf of a user, and the server end is
the program which provides a searching interface over a set of databases
for the client. There can be many servers, with many clients sharing
them. In theory, a server can also be a client to other servers, but
this may not be very useful or efficient.

The client runs queries in the same way that it would on local databases
- the difference is in how the database is opened. Once the database is
opened, the query process is identical to any other. Using a stub
database with "auto" backend is a good way to wrap up access to a remote
database in a neat way.

The remote backend currently support two client/server methods: prog and
tcp. They both use the same protocol, although different means to
contact the server.

The Prog Method
---------------

The prog method spawns a program when the database is opened, and
communicates with it over a pipe. This can be used to connect to a
remote Xapian database across an SSH tunnel for example, providing
authentication and encryption. The xapian-progsrv program is designed to
be the program at the far end of the connection.

From the client end, create the database with
``Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open(program, args));`` -
for example::

    Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open("ssh", "search.example.com xapian-progsrv /var/lib/xapian/data/db1"));

If the program has no path, the PATH environment variable is used.

The TCP Method
--------------

The tcp method uses TCP/IP sockets to connect to a running server on a
remote machine (or indeed a local one, but that's rather pointless!)

From the client end, create the database with
``Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open(host, port));`` - for
example:
::

    Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open("searchserver", 33333));

The host is the server's hostname, the port is the tcp port on the
server to use.

The server is xapian-tcpsrv, which is installed by xapian-core's
"``make install``". This should be started and left running in the
background before searches are performed.

The arguments xapian-tcpsrv currently knows are::

  --port PORTNUM
  (required) the port to listen on.
  --one-shot
  Handle one connection, and then exit. If --one-shot is not used, then
  the server runs until it is killed manually.
  --idle-timeout MSECS
  Set the timeout on a idle connection.
  --active-timeout MSECS
  Set the timeout waiting for responses when the connection is active.
  --timeout MSECS
  Set the idle and active timeouts to the same value.
  --quiet
  Minimal output.

One or more databases need to be specified by listing their directories
- they are opened using the "auto" pseudo-backend.

Once started, the server will run and listen for connections on the
configured port. Each connection is handled by a forked child process
(or a new thread under Windows), so concurrent read access is supported.

Notes
-----

A remote search should behave just like the equivalent local one, except
a few features aren't currently implemented (e.g. spelling, synonyms,
user metadata).

Exceptions are propagated across the link and thrown again at the client
end.

The remote backend now support writable databases. Just start
``xapian-progsrv`` or ``xapian-tcpsrv`` with the option ``--writable``.
Only one database may be specified.

Commit message:

docs/remote.rst: Replace out-dated list of xapian-tcpsrv's command line options with a reference to --help and the man page.  Tweak wording in a few places.
git-svn-id: file:///home/xapian-svn/xapian/trunk@15541 6b2f1b92-a4f3-0310-943f-de3cbe41748b

xapian-core/docs/remote.rst, after:

Remote Backend
==============

This document describes how to make use of the facilities in Xapian for
distributed searches.

Overview
--------

There are two sides to the distributed searching. The client end is the
program initiating the search on behalf of a user, and the server end is
the program which provides a searching interface over a set of databases
for the client. There can be many servers, with many clients sharing
them. In theory, a server can also be a client to other servers, but
this may not be very useful or efficient.

The client runs queries in the same way that it would on local databases
- the difference is in how the database is opened. Once the database is
opened, the query process is identical to any other. Using a stub
database with "auto" backend is a good way to wrap up access to a remote
database in a neat way.

The remote backend currently support two client/server methods: prog and
tcp. They both use the same protocol, although different means to
contact the server.

The Prog Method
---------------

The prog method spawns a program when the database is opened, and
communicates with it over a pipe. This can be used to connect to a
remote Xapian database across an SSH tunnel for example, providing
authentication and encryption. The xapian-progsrv program is designed to
be the program at the far end of the connection.

From the client end, create the database with
``Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open(program, args));`` -
for example::

    Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open("ssh", "search.example.com xapian-progsrv /var/lib/xapian/data/db1"));

If the program has no path, the PATH environment variable is used.

The TCP Method
--------------

The tcp method uses TCP/IP sockets to connect to a running server on a
remote machine (or indeed a local one, but that's rather pointless!)

From the client end, create the database with
``Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open(host, port));`` - for
example:
::

    Xapian::Database database(Xapian::Remote::open("searchserver", 33333));

The host is the server's hostname, the port is the tcp port on the
server to use.

The server is xapian-tcpsrv, which is installed by xapian-core's
"``make install``". This should be started and left running in the
background before searches are performed.

One or more databases need to be specified by listing their paths.

There's also one required command line option for xapian-tcpsrv: ``--port
PORTNUM``, which specifies the port to listen on.  For the full list of
accepted command line options, run ``xapian-tcpsrv --help`` or see the
xapian-tcpsrv man page.

Once started, the server will run and listen for connections on the
specified port. Each connection is handled by a forked child process
(or a new thread under Windows), so concurrent read access is supported.

Notes
-----

A remote search should behave just like the equivalent local one, except
a few features aren't currently implemented (e.g. spelling, synonyms,
user metadata).

Exceptions are propagated across the link and thrown again at the client
end.

The remote backend now support writable databases. Just start
``xapian-progsrv`` or ``xapian-tcpsrv`` with the option ``--writable``.
Only one database may be specified when ``--writable`` is used.
